- [Instructor] Let's talk in general about
how a HashMap uses the hashCode
and equals methods when storing a key value pair.
Internally, a HashMap contains an array
with a default size of 16 that is used to store nodes.
In this diagram, I've reduced this down
to three indexes to make it easier to view.
When the put method accepts a key value pair,
the HashMap calls the hashCode method
on the key to get its hash value.
It then applies logic that hashes the value
a second time to build a new hash.
This is used to compute the index
where the values will be stored in the array.
In this index, a new node is created
that contains the key, value and derived hash value
for the objects placed into the map.
This process continues each time
the put method is called with a new key value pair.
If we have a collision of hash values
and objects must be placed in the same index that's okay.
The new node is linked together with the existing nodes
to build a link list within the array index.
So, that is the general logic of how storage
works internally within a HashMap.
And, admittedly, we skipped a few minor points.
Now, let's talk about retrieving a value from a HashMap.
When a key is passed to the get method on a HashMap,
the map first performs the hashing and index logic
to determine the appropriate array index
to search for the key's value.
So, here, we see the provided key computes
to an index of 1, that index currently holds
a link list with two nodes.
If there were only a single node stored in the index,
the search logic could easily return
the value from that single node.
But since there are multiple nodes stored within the index,
the HashMap uses the equals method to compare
the provided key with the key stored in the node.
In this case, the first node didn't match,
so the logic traverses the reference
to the next node in the link list.
Then, it performs the equals comparison again.
This time it evaluates to true causing the value
in the node to be returned.
So basically the equals method resolves
the hashCode collision, and you start
to see why implementing the hashCode
and equals methods is necessary for working with a map.
The internal workings of a HashMap is sometimes assessed
in technical interviews so now, you'll be prepared
for the question, if it arises, and you'll have
a better grasp on how hashing structures function.